\documentclass[10pt,preprint]{aastex}
\usepackage{psboxit}

\newcommand{\kms}{\,km~s$^{-1}$}
\def\squig{\sim\!\!}
\newcommand{\Msun}{\mbox{\,$M_{\odot}$}}
\newcommand{\Lsun}{\mbox{\,$L_{\odot}$}}

\PScommands
\newcommand{\graybox}[1]{\psboxit{box 0.7 setgray fill}{\spbox{#1}}}

\newcommand{\mdmlimit}{0.5}
\newcommand{\vmaxmean}{56}
\newcommand{\mrmean}{-14.7}

\newcommand{\latin}[1]{{#1}}
\newcommand{\ie}{\latin{i.e.}}
\newcommand{\eg}{\latin{e.g.}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\latin{c.f.}}
\newcommand{\Sersic}{S\'ersic}
\newcommand{\vv}[1]{{\bf #1}}
\newcommand{\df}{\delta}
\newcommand{\dfft}{{\tilde{\delta}}}
\newcommand{\betaft}{{\tilde{\beta}}}
\newcommand{\erf}{{\mathrm{erf}}}
\newcommand{\erfc}{{\mathrm{erfc}}}
\newcommand{\Step}{{\mathrm{Step}}}
\newcommand{\ee}[1]{\times 10^{#1}}
\newcommand{\avg}[1]{{\langle{#1}\rangle}}
\newcommand{\Avg}[1]{{\left\langle{#1}\right\rangle}}
\def\simless{\mathbin{\lower 3pt\hbox
    {$\,\rlap{\raise 5pt\hbox{$\char'074$}}\mathchar"7218\,$}}} % < or of order
\def\simgreat{\mathbin{\lower 3pt\hbox
    {$\,\rlap{\raise 5pt\hbox{$\char'076$}}\mathchar"7218\,$}}} % > or of order
\newcommand{\iras}{{\sl IRAS\/}}
\newcommand{\petroratio}{{{\mathcal{R}}_P}}
\newcommand{\petroradius}{{{r}_P}}
\newcommand{\petronumber}{{{N}_P}}
\newcommand{\petroratiolim}{{{\mathcal{R}}_{P,\mathrm{lim}}}}
\newcommand{\band}[2]{\ensuremath{^{#1}\!{#2}}}
\newcommand{\Vmax}{\ensuremath{V_\mmax}}
\newcommand{\mmax}{\ensuremath{\mathrm{max}}}
\newcommand{\mmin}{\ensuremath{\mathrm{min}}}
\newcommand{\minmax}{\ensuremath{\mathrm{\left\{^{min}_{max}\right\}}}}
\newcommand{\fixMr}{\ensuremath{M_\fixr}}
\newcommand{\fixr}{\ensuremath{{r}}}
\newcommand{\fixredshift}{0.1}
\newcommand{\fixmag}[1]{\ensuremath{{^{\fixredshift}\!{#1}}}}

\setlength{\footnotesep}{9.6pt}

\newcounter{thefigs}
\newcommand{\fignum}{\arabic{thefigs}}

\newcounter{thetabs}
\newcommand{\tabnum}{\arabic{thetabs}}

\newcounter{address}

\shortauthors{Blanton {\it et al.} (2006)}
\shorttitle{Improved background subtraction for SDSS}

\begin{document}

\title{Improved background subtraction for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey}


\author{
Michael R. Blanton\altaffilmark{\ref{NYU}},
Eyal Kazin\altaffilmark{\ref{NYU}},
Adrian Price-Whelan\altaffilmark{\ref{NYU}}, 
Benjamin A. Weaver\altaffilmark{\ref{NYU}}
}

%\altaffiltext{1}{Based on observations obtained with the
%Sloan Digital Sky Survey\label{SDSS}}
\setcounter{address}{1}
\altaffiltext{\theaddress}{
    \stepcounter{address}
    Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, Department of Physics, New
    York University, 4 Washington Place, New
    York, NY 10003
    \label{NYU}}

\begin{abstract}
We describe a procedure for background-subtracting Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS) imaging in a manner that improves the resulting
detection and photometry of large galaxies on the sky. Our method
treats each drift scan run as a whole and fits a smooth function to
variation of the sky background to a heavily masked and binned image
of the run. We have run our procedure on the full Data Release 8, with
which these sky subtraction results are released.  As a unit test of
quality, we compare the photometry of point sources in mosaics based
on these images relative to the SDSS catalog, finding good
agreement. More critically, we have also tested the effect of our
background subtraction on the photometry of large galaxies by
inserting fake galaxies into the raw data and attempting to measure
them after background subtraction.  Our technique introduces biases
only at half-light radii $r_{50}>100$ arcsec. These sky-subtracted
images can provide the basis of upcoming studies of the local
Universe.
\end{abstract}


\section{Why improve the sky-subtraction?}
\label{sec:intro}

The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (\citealt{york00a}) is the largest
existing survey of the sky to date. As of Data Release 8 (DR8;
\citealt{agol11a}), it has provided reliable, well-calibrated catalogs
down to $r\sim 22.5$ over 14,500 square degrees of sky, in five bands
($u$, $g$, $r$, $i$ and $z$).  In so doing, it has provided images of
a large fraction of the known bright galaxies on the sky --- the
Messier and NGC objects, as well as lower surface brightness nearby
galaxies. However, no reliable catalog of the properties of these
galaxies yet exists, primarily because no standard background
subtraction procedure has been implemented that properly treats the
largest, brightest galaxies in the sky. The purpose of this paper is
to provide just such a background procedure, which has now been run
over the entire SDSS imaging dataset, and which is being released as
part of DR8.

Background subtraction of astronomical images is probably a formally
impossible task.  The ideal treatment of the data gathered by a
detector would be to explain (at reasonable $\chi^2$) the counts in
each pixel, using a physical model of the sky brightness and its
gradients, the telescopic optics and scattered light properties, the
astronomical and other sources of light, and the sensitivity, noise
and other properties of the detector.
%For such a model to be useful,
%it would have to successfully partition light among the individual
%astronomical sources as well, so that they could be photometered
%individually.
However, this task is impractical and likely intractable as well,
given the detail needed in such a model, the time variability of
conditions and instruments, and the probable necessity of treating all
the data simultaneously. For this reason, most practical applications
of background subtraction tend to focus on simple approximations that
are tractable as well as close to correct for the problems of
interest.

For the SDSS, the standard photometric pipeline takes just such a
practical and accurate approach ({\tt photo}; \citealt{lupton01a}). In
the catalog released in Data Release 7 (DR7; \citealt{abazajian09a}),
{\tt photo} calculates the median-smoothed background on a scale of
$100\times100$ arcsec and subtracts that from the image before object
detection and measurement.  In the catalog release in DR8, a more
sophisticated approach is used, which first models the brightest
galaxies in each field so that they do not contaminate the sky
estimate as much.

For faint point source photometry the above approach is highly
accurate (at least, as long as confusion is not a problem). In almost
all cases, any diffuse light is subtracted away (whatever its source)
while the point source itself is left untouched. For these sources, it
is not necessary to fully model the background --- just to separate
point sources from any diffuse sources. The resulting fluxes of stars
are generally repeatable at well below the percent level; that is, as
well as can be expected given the vagaries of determining the overall
calibration of the data set (\citealt{padmanabhan07a}).

However, for galaxies the approach that {\tt photo} uses is more
troublesome.  Whereas it is appropriate for galaxies of small enough
angular extent, for larger galaxies it can be inappropriate.
Typically, this method of sky subtraction causes an underestimate in
their flux, size, and concentration (\citealt{west05a, blanton05b,
hyde09a, west10a}). This problem becomes particularly evident for the
nearby brightest cluster galaxies (\citealt{bernardi07a,
lauer07a}). While the DR8 algorithms represent a modest improvement in
the sky subtraction, the bulk of the problem remains.

In \S\ref{sec:model} below we present a different method for sky
subtraction that is more accurate for large galaxies (while retaining
most of the accuracy for point sources). Our method begins with the
estimate of the sky background from a processed SDSS imaging run.  It
builds masks around all bright detected sources, and any known sources
close to but outside the edge of the imaging run. Then it fits a
smooth spline to the unmasked data, applying appropriate constraints
to regularize the problem in the presence of the heavy masking.

In \S\ref{sec:mosaic} we describe how we take sky subtracted SDSS
fields and mosaic them into single image. We have produced 1~deg by
1~deg FITS format mosaics over the entire North Galactic Cap covered
by the SDSS DR7, and provide access to snap-shots up this area on the
web.

In \S\ref{sec:endtoend}, we test the resulting photometry of these images
in two ways.  First, we compare aperture photometry of point sources
to the standard SDSS aperture photometry, to quantify how much
degradation our mosaicking procedure and sky subtraction have
introduced.

Second, we insert fake bright galaxies into the raw data and reanalyze
the data completely.  We then compare our background-subtracted
mosaicked images to the original fake data to evaluate the fidelity of
our procedure. We also evaluate the performance of two versions of the
standard SDSS pipelines (the ones used in SDSS DR7 and DR8).

Third, we compare to the only other publicly available mosaicking and
background subtraction facility for SDSS that we are aware of, the
Montage tool distributed by IRSA (\citealt{berriman03a}). We compare
their methodology to ours in \S\ref{sec:mosaic}, concluding that their
background subtraction procedure in principle could be superior to
ours, but that their ``drizzle'' approximation to interpolation is
could cause errors for PSF photometry. In \S\ref{sec:psfs}, we
demonstrate that the PSF photometry is indeed very slightly degraded
relative to the original SDSS photometry for Montage mosaics. In
\S\ref{sec:simplegal}, we compare our bright galaxy photometry to that
from Montage images, finding excellent agreement.

The results described here are available on a field-by-field basis
through the SDSS DR8.\footnote{\tt http://www.sdss3.org/dr8.php} A
previous version of the results, for DR7, is also still
available\footnote{\tt http://sdss.physics.nyu.edu/mosaic/}.

\section{A model fit to the SDSS sky background}
\label{sec:model}

\subsection{The SDSS imaging data}
\label{sec:data}

The SDSS has taken $ugriz$ CCD imaging of $14,555~\mathrm{deg^2}$ of
the sky \citep{york00a,agol11a}.  Automated software performs all of
the data processing: astrometry \citep{pier03a}; source
identification, deblending and photometry \citep{lupton01a};
photometricity determination \citep{hogg01a}; and calibration
\citep{fukugita96a,smith02a, padmanabhan07b}.

As \citet{gunn05a} describe, the SDSS focal plane has 30 imaging CCDs
evenly spaced (with gaps) across it, six ``camcols'' of each filter
($u$, $g$, $r$, $i$ and $z$). Each exposure is taken in drift scan
mode, such that a point in the sky passes through each CCD
sequentially with a gap of 72 seconds or so.  The native pixel scale
on the CCDs is approximately 0.396 arcsec; when we refer to pixels in
this paper it is this native scale we will mean. When we discuss these
images, we will refer to the position in the scan direction as the
``pixel row'' or $y$, and the position perpendicular to the scan
direction as the ``pixel column'' or $x$.

Figure \ref{fig:rawrun} shows this geometry for part of run number
1336 in the $r$-band, showing each camcol horizontally and the gaps in
between each one. Thus each such run can be considered to consist of
thirty long rectangular images, one in each filter and camcol. In the
standard SDSS pipeline, each camcol is further broken into multiple
``fields,'' each with a width of 1361 pixels in the scan direction.

The image shown is approximately the standard SDSS pipeline's estimate
of the background light used for photometry, binned 8$\times$8. It is
equal to the actual counts in areas where there were no detected
objects, and is equal to the background estimate plus appropriate
noise in areas where there were detected objects. This determination
is made before any calibration except for the flat-field correction
--- which is only a function of pixel column since the observations
are drift scans.  It is about 2.3 deg wide and represents about 25
minutes of exposure time. The units are raw counts --- because of the
varying gains among the CCDs two of camcols mostly saturate in this
particular image stretch.

SDSS's background light estimation consists of a median-smoothed image
on a scale of 100$\times$100 arcsec. Clearly Figure \ref{fig:rawrun}
demonstrates that bright objects have a substantial amount of their
light removed during background subtraction --- the background shows
clearly the presence of bright stars.  We will proceed by fitting a
much smoother function to this SDSS sky estimate in order to model the
clear variation with the background with time but not oversubtract the
brightest objects.

\subsection{Masking the data}
\label{sec:mask}

The first step is to mask the data appropriately. Clearly whatever
smooth function we use, we cannot allow it to be strongly affected by
the presence of bright stars. We begin by defining an initial mask
around known bright objects.

First, we identify any objects detected in the SDSS catalog with
$m<15$ in the filter in question. We create a mask of size
32$\times$32 native SDSS pixels around the faintest such objects,
growing with decreasing magnitude to 1600$\times$1600 pixels at $m=12$
(and constant with magnitude for brighter objects).  This mask handles
stars inside the imaging run well.

However, galaxies within the imaging run are frequently shredded into
fragments by the SDSS deblender, and it is more complex to determine
what area to mask based on the SDSS catalog alone. Therefore, we also
identify any galaxies from the Third Reference Catalog (RC3;
\citealt{devaucouleurs91a}) that land within the imaging run and build
masks around those objects that are 1000$\times$1000 pixels.

Finally, the SDSS filters suffer from internal reflection at their
edges, causing stars just outside the frame to scatter light onto the
CCD. Our model is too smooth to subtract these internal reflections,
and we do not want its large scale features affected by these local
phenomena.  Therefore, we mask these reflections by identifying any
stars from the Tycho-2 catalog that lie just outside the frame and
masking a rectangular region 1500$\times$900 pixels centered on the
star (the reflection has a larger extent in the pixel column direction
than in the row direction).

Occasionally SDSS fields have such a bright object inside of them that
the SDSS pipeline fails to reduce them at all.  We mask the entirety
of such fields from our fits.

Figure \ref{fig:mask} shows this initial mask for the run shown in
Figure \ref{fig:rawrun}. White areas are those to be used in the fit,
while black areas are those to be ignored. The mask is intentionally
very conservative --- we want to minimize the flux that is incorrectly
assigned to the sky background. Furthermore, as described in the next
section, we apply further iterative masking based on the results of
our fit.

\subsection{Spline model fit}
\label{sec:spline}

In order to fit the data, we first further bin it from 8$\times$8 to
8$\times$680 --- that is, we heavily bin it in the pixel row
direction.  We keep the resolution in the pixel column direction
because the sky ends up tracking some residual flat-fielding
errors. When rebinning, we account for the weights.

The spline model that we fit to the final binned data is as follows:
\begin{equation}
\label{skyspline}
    f(\mathrm{camcol}, x, y) = S(\mathrm{camcol}) \times
    Y(\mathrm{camcol}, y) \times X(\mathrm{camcol}, x, y),
\end{equation}
where $x$ and $y$ are the pixel column and row positions.
$S(\mathrm{camcol})$ is an overall scaling factor for each
camcol. $Y(\mathrm{camcol}, y)$ is a second-order b-spline for each
camcol, with break-points spaced approximately per SDSS field (1361
pixels). Thus, it expresses the overall variation of the sky over time
during the scan.  $X(\mathrm{camcol}, x, y)$ is a second-order
b-spline in two dimensions, with break-points in the $x$ direction
spaced once every 8 pixels and in the $y$ direction spaced every 40
fields. Thus, it allows for a rapid variation with column (which
accounts for flat-fielding errors) but allows that pattern to vary
slowly over time.

To fit the data, we (approximately) perform $\chi^2$ minimization of
the data with respect to the model. In detail, we first determine $S$
by taking a median across each camcol.

Second, we divide each camcol by $S$ and perform $\chi^2$ minimization
to fit $Y$ alone. We quadratically couple the spline parameters
strongly in the row direction to keep the fit smooth. In addition, we
allow a small quadratic coupling between the camcols in order to
interpolate more smoothly over masked data. These quadratic couplings
retain the linearity of the $\chi^2$ fit.

Third, we divide the data by $S$ and $Y$, and finally perform a second
$\chi^2$ minimization, this time for $X$. Again, we allow coupling
between the spline parameters.  In this case, we allow weak coupling
between the parameters in the row direction but very strong coupling
in the column direction, to keep $X$ as smooth as it can be. In the
$\chi^2$ minimizations for $Y$ and $X$, we use the mask weights, but
no inverse variance weighting.

We have a special condition for CCDs that have two amplifiers rather
than one. For such CCDs, half the pixels are read out by one device
and half by another; therefore, we do not couple the pixels across the
divide, and indeed we observe that the gains of the amplifiers do
drift at the fraction of the percent-level over the course of each
run.

Finally, given a fit function $f(\mathrm{camcol}, x, y)$ we estimate
an rms dispersion $\sigma$ around the fit, and then mask all regions
that are greater than 2$\sigma$ from the fit (in addition to the
initial mask described in \S\ref{sec:mask}). We then iterate the fit
four more times.

An example final fit is shown in Figure \ref{fig:model}. This model is
non-parametric and not physical --- consequently, for diffuse, but
real, sources many arcminutes in size, our method will by design
oversubtract the light.  However, Section
\S\ref{sec:simplegal} below shows that it is sufficiently good to
allow accurate measurements of most nearby galaxies.

Figure \ref{fig:resid} shows the residuals of the data after
subtracting the model sky.  There are remaining discrepancies visible,
which in the next subsection we will show to be at a level that is
fainter than 26 mag arcsec$^{-2}$.

\subsection{Residual tests}
\label{sec:residuals}

We have performed a simple residual test by considering random
unmasked patches 13$\times$13 native SDSS pixels in size. We choose
the areas that the SDSS photometric pipeline has identified as ``sky''
objects, without identified objects.  

Figure \ref{fig:skyqa} shows the distribution of the mean fluxes per
square arcsec in such patches across all SDSS runs. The performance in
most areas is excellent, with a standard deviation representing
residuals fainter than $26$ mag arcsec$^{-2}$ in the $r$-band. There
are a handful of outliers, which we find nearly always to be
associated with very extended emission from the interstellar medium or
an extremely bright star. While in regions of very extended emission,
we cannot guarantee that our sky estimate is correct, we do expect
that they will appear as bright outliers in this residual plot.

These residual tests are adequate insofar as they test the performance
of our fitting procedure and help to identify runs with highly
variable backgrounds (astronomical or instrumental).  However, they do
not provide a direct estimate of the effects of sky subtraction errors
on the resulting galaxy photometry --- that is, they do not test
whether we might be oversubtracting light near large sources.  We test
that effect more thoroughly in \S\ref{sec:simplegal}.

\subsection{Distribution of sky-subtracted fields}
\label{sec:fields}

As part of the SDSS DR8, we are distributing all of the
sky-subtracted, calibrated fields in each band based on this
procedure, in FITS format. This data consists of approximately 
940,000 fields, each 2048$\times$1489 pixels in size. This data is
available for download on an individual field basis (or requesting
cutouts) from {\tt http://data.sdss3.org/}. 

The format of the data is FITS files, each of which has a primary HDU
containing a floating-point image, calibrated in units of nanomaggies
per pixel.  These images are compressed by zeroing out all but the 10
most significant binary digits in the floating point numbers, and
subsequently using {\tt bzip2} to losslessly compress the result. For
the sky-subtracted images, the 10th binary digit is considerably
smaller than the noise in any image, meaning that although overall
this compression is slightly lossy, it has no significant effect on
the results --- even if these images are combined in a stack
(\citealt{pricewhelan10a}).  Subsequent HDUs in each image yield the
sky-subtraction and calibration image, so that the sky can be added
back in and the image put back into counts if so desired. Full details
of the format and location of the files can be found in the SDSS-III
data
model.\footnote{\tt http://data.sdss3.org/datamodel/files/BOSS\_PHOTOOBJ/frames/RERUN/RUN/CAMCOL/frame.html} 


\section{Mosaicking the SDSS}
\label{sec:mosaic}

\subsection{Generating mosaics}

The point of our sky subtraction is to improve measurements of large
objects on the sky.  Many such objects overlap the edges of SDSS
fields (and some are bigger than or comparable to the size of a single
field).  Thus, to recover their photometry we must mosaic together
multiple fields after the background subtraction. Here we describe our
procedure for doing so.

For each desired mosaic we specify a desired World Coordinate System
header (WCS; \citealt{greisen02a}). We identify all SDSS fields that
overlap the desired area, and pick the minimal set of photometric
fields that cover that area.

Then we prepare each field for mosaicking.  Starting with the raw SDSS
data, we apply the flat field determined by the ubercalibration
procedure (\citealt{padmanabhan07b}). Using a procedure similar to
that used by the SDSS pipeline, we identify cosmic rays
(\citealt{lupton01a}). We interpolate over saturated pixels and cosmic
rays using simple linear interpolation in the $x$ direction.  Then we
estimate the sky by evaluating the function described by Equation
\ref{skyspline} at each pixel, and subtract it. In the sky estimate,
we account for any difference in the flat field as originally used by
the SDSS photometric pipeline, and as determined by
ubercalibration. Finally, we apply the photometric calibration using
the results of \citet{padmanabhan07b} for each field.

To resample each image we evaluate the position of each desired pixel
within each original field. Then we interpolate the original field's
image to the desired set of locations, using the well-known cubic
approximation to the sinc function (\citealt{park83a}). This
resampling method is known to work well for Nyquist-sampled images, a
condition SDSS virtually always satisfies. In practice, we use the
built-in IDL utilities {\tt polywarp} and {\tt poly\_2d} to perform
this resampling.

We evaluate the weighted average of the flux from all the input images
at each output pixel. The weights are unity throughout most of each
input image, but are apodized smoothly to zero at the edges. Thus, the
transition between regions which overlap two fields are relatively
smooth. Any output pixels that have no overlapping input images are
set to zero.

\subsection{Example mosaics}

Figure \ref{fig:examples} show several example mosaics created with
this procedure.  We have obviously chosen these partly for dramatic
effect, but also to demonstrate the robustness of the masking to the
presence of large, bright objects of various sorts: globular clusters,
galaxy clusters, and large galaxies.

\subsection{Distribution of mosaics}
\label{sec:distmosaic}

Although our procedures allow us to evaluate any arbitrary mosaic, for
ease of distribution we have created a set of 1$\times$1 deg mosaics
across the entire observed Northern Galactic Cap, or almost 8000
deg$^2$. We have created a web interface that allows users to easily
extract sections of these mosaics.\footnote{\tt
http://sdss.physics.nyu.edu/mosaic/}

This interface can be used either interactively or
non-interactively. The interactive method allows the user to browse a
Google sky viewer and select the region of interest.  The
non-interactive method is explained in the documentation.  In either
case, the user is returned FITS format images in each desired
bandpass, with correct WCS headers, sky-subtracted and calibrated. The
units of the images are nanomaggies per pixel.

Note that we have not yet produced any such mosaics of the area imaged
in SDSS-III's new imaging in the South Galactic Cap. However, the
standard DR8 data release tools do provide mosaicking tools.

\subsection{Comparison to Montage}

The only other publicly available mosaicking and background
subtraction facility for SDSS that we are aware of is the results of
the Montage package distributed by IRSA
\citep{berriman03a,berriman04a}. We will describe the quantitative
differences between their results and ours below.  Here we discuss
methodological differences.

The first major difference is in their method for background
subtraction. While in our case we rely on a smooth fit to regions with
no objects, Montage fits a smooth additive term within each run to
minimize the differences between it and other overlapping images. In
regions with many overlapping images, this procedure can be far
superior to ours. Over much of the SDSS area the only overlapping
images are at the north and south edges of each field, and how the
Montage algorithm behaves in that regime is a quantitative
question. We compare our results to theirs for large galaxies in
\S\ref{sec:simplegal} below.

The second major difference is in their method for ``resampling'' of
images. They do not perform a normal resampling but instead use a
generalized version of the ``drizzle'' algorithm. This algorithm
computes the fraction of each original pixel that overlaps each output
pixel, and distributes the original pixel's flux accordingly. Relative
to properly resampling a Nyquist-sampled image, such methods do a poor
job at maintaining the original PSF (or even at producing an image
with a well-defined PSF). They are also clearly irreversible
operations even in the noiseless case, demonstrating that information
is lost and the image is consequently degraded. We compare our results
to the Montage results for point sources in \S\ref{sec:psfs} below,
and believe that Montage's less good at the bright end in those tests
is due to their drizzling procedure. However, it is unlikely that
these issues affect our main interest here, which is large galaxies on
the sky.

\section{End-to-end tests of the sky background}
\label{sec:endtoend}

\subsection{Evaluating photometry}
\label{sec:e2eintro}

The residual tests of \S\ref{sec:residuals} are fine as far as they go,
but are of little use in evaluating the quality of the photometry of
objects in the masked regions.  In order to do that, we need to
compare to ground truth (possible to some extent for point sources;
\S\ref{sec:psfs}) or simulate the analysis of objects similar to
those we are interested in (necessary for galaxies;
\S\ref{sec:simplegal} and \S\ref{sec:deblendgal}).

\subsection{PSF photometry}
\label{sec:psfs}

The standard SDSS analysis should be at its finest for point sources.
In fact, because that analysis avoids interpolation, regridding or
stacking of the data we expect that its performance will be superior
than anything that our background-subtracted mosaics could
produce. Therefore, as a quality assurance tool to demonstrate how
photometric our images are, we compare aperture photometry of point
sources in our mosaics to that reported by the standard SDSS
pipeline. The main goal here is to verify that the overall scale of
the mosaicked images is correct and that the signal-to-noise has not
been degraded.

We randomly choose twenty 1 degree square mosaics. Because we are here
interested in point source photometry, before analysis we perform a
local sky subtraction, on the same scales as SDSS uses (100 arcsec
median smoothed).  We of course will not do so in the analysis of
large galaxies. From the overlapping SDSS catalog, we choose
unsaturated stars with no neighbors within 15 arcsec.  For each we
measure a circular aperture flux within a 7.3 arcsec radius (the
standard aperture used by the ubercalibration pipline).  Then, we
compare this flux to that reported within the same aperture by the
standard SDSS pipeline.

Figure \ref{fig:sdss_qa_magdiff} shows (as a function of magnitude)
the flux ratios between the 7.3 arcsec aperture flux measured from a
random set of twenty of our mosaic images, and that reported by the
SDSS catalog, for each SDSS band. The overall scale of the magnitudes
is close to correct, with less than a 1\% difference between our
results and SDSS at bright magnitudes.

Figure \ref{fig:sdss_qa_scaled} shows the distribution of flux
differences, scaled to the expected error distribution. The lines are
the 16\%, 50\% and 84\% quantiles. This distribution is close to the
normal distribution, an indication that our mosaicking procedure does
not degrade the image very badly.  Of course it does degrade to some
degree, an effect particularly noticeable at the faintest magnitudes,
where the median difference becomes almost 0.5$\sigma$ and the
distribution is significantly wider then the normal distribution.

We perform the same pair of tests on twenty Montage mosaics of the
same regions; results are shown in Figures
\ref{fig:montage_qa_magdiff} and \ref{fig:montage_qa_scaled}.  The
flux ratios reveal a scale difference between the Montage
images and the SDSS catalog of 3--5\%.
%This difference is suspiciously
%close to the fractional difference between the solid angle of a native
%SDSS pixel (0.396 arcsec) and the solid angle of the pixels output by
%Montage by default (0.4 arcsec).  The sense and magnitude of the error
%is similar to that which would result if the Montage images were
%output in units of flux per native SDSS pixel instead of flux per
%Montage-sized pixel. However,
We have not investigated their procedure thoroughly enough to diagnose
the cause of this error.  In any case, as an overall flux error this
problem is relatively minor for our purposes here.

In Figure \ref{fig:montage_qa_scaled}, we have first accounted for the
scale error before considering the flux differences. Having done so,
the error distribution clusters around zero.  At faint magnitudes the
distribution is similar to ours; at bright magnitudes it is
considerably broader. We suspect that this broad distribution is due
to the degradation of the image caused by the drizzling procedure. As
we see below, however, these errors appear to be less important when
considering larger, brighter objects. 

\subsection{Galaxy photometry: isolating the effect of the background}
\label{sec:simplegal}

In the previous section, we considered the effects of our procedures
on point source photometry, to verify that our images did reasonably
well relative to the ``ground truth'' established by the SDSS standard
photometry.  In the case of galaxy photometry, we do not trust the
SDSS standard results --- in fact, it is our goal to improve that
photometry substantially.  Therefore, we must use a different tactic
to test our results.

Our procedure is to insert fake galaxies into the raw data, using the
same tools developed by \citet{blanton05b} and used by several other
investigators since (\citealt{blanton04b, mandelbaum06a, masjedi06a}).
We distribute fake galaxy images onto a random set of locations on the
sky covered by SDSS fields. For each observation of an object in an
SDSS field in each band, we convert the fake stamps to SDSS raw data
units, convolve with the estimated seeing from the SDSS photometric
pipeline, and add Poisson noise using the estimates of the gain. We
add the resulting image to the real SDSS raw data, including the tiny
effects of nonlinearity in the response and the less tiny flat-field
variation as a function of column on the chip. We then run the SDSS
photometric pipeline {\tt photo} as well as our sky subtraction
procedure. Then, around each fake galaxy that we insert, we create a
mosaic using the tools described above.

The fake galaxy sample is based on the low redshift sample from the
New York University Value-Added Galaxy Catalog (\citealt{blanton05a}),
as updated for SDSS Data Release 6 (see, for example,
\citealt{zhu10a}). This sample consists of essentially all galaxies
with $r<17.77$ and $z<0.05$.  For each galaxy, we take its flux,
half-light radius, \Sersic\ index, axis ratio, and $ugriz$ colors from
the SDSS data. We then reassign each galaxy a redshift in the range
$0.0033<z<0.025$ (constrained to be smaller than the actual
redshift), and adjust its size and flux accordingly.  This procedure
yields a realistic distribution of sizes, fluxes, profile shapes and
colors, with an emphasis on the large, nearby galaxies of most
interest here. 

To test how well our sky-subtraction is doing, we ask how much flux it
removes from the field surrounding the object. In particular, we use
an aperture with a radius of $r_{95}$, containing 95\% of the light of
the galaxy.  We use the fake, sky-subtracted field and calculate the
flux in each band in that aperture.  We then use the real,
sky-subtracted field and calculate the flux in the same aperture.  Of
course, in the fake data the sky-subtraction will inevitably subtract
off a slightly different (usualla larger) amount of light than in the
real data. The fake aperture flux minus the real aperture flux is
equal to the fake galaxy flux that remains in the image after sky
subtraction --- the measured fake galaxy flux $f_{\mathrm{meas}}$, to
be compared with the original input fake galaxy flux
$f_{\mathrm{orig}}$.

In Figure \ref{fig:r_offsets}, we plot $\Delta m =
-2.5\log_{10}(f_{\mathrm{meas}}/f_{\mathrm{orig}})$, the residual of
the measured fake galaxy flux with respect to the original, as a
function of the galaxy half-light radius $r_{50}$.  The filled circles
are from our results here. We find that $\Delta m$ is most strongly
related to this property of the fake galaxy images. There is no
systematic offset of any signficance until $r_{50}>100$ arcsec, which
indicates a rather large galaxy. The largest galaxies get to $r_{50}=
10$--$20$ $h^{-1}$ kpc in size, and such galaxies would have $r_{50} =
100$ arcsec at a distance of 20--40 $h^{-1}$ Mpc. Thus, we can expect
some of the largest galaxies on the sky --- for example, certain
Messier objects --- to have up to 20--30\% of their flux subtracted by
this procedure.

In Figure \ref{fig:r_offsets}, the open circles are the SDSS {\tt photo}
measurements of the fake galaxies, using the so-called ``cModel''
fluxes, defined in terms of the best fit combination of the de
Vaucouleurs and exponential models as follows:
\begin{equation}
 f_c = f_{\mathrm{exp}} \left(1-\mathtt{fracdeV}\right) +
 f_{\mathrm{deV}}
 \times \mathtt{fracdeV}
\end{equation}
These show a much larger
underestimation of the flux at much smaller radii --- it becomes
signficant at $r_{50}>10$ arcsec. Of course, this comparison is
somewhat unfair: the {\tt photo} software also attempts to deblend the
galaxies from their surroundings. However, the overall trend is due
to the median-smoothing sky subtraction procedure used.  We emphasize
that for the primary SDSS target sample at $z\sim 0.1$ 
the issue is not nearly as dire as it appears in this plot --- the
largest such galaxies have $r_{50}\sim 10$--20 arcsec, for which the
effects are small. 

\citet{hyde09a} found similar result to what we find here. The solid
line in Figure \ref{fig:r_offsets} shows their parametrized estimate
of the magnitude offset for elliptical galaxies as a function of
size. The correction between the SDSS estimates of the fluxes of real
galaxies and their estimates appears somewhat larger than what we
infer here for our fake sample, but also shows a steep dependence on
galaxy size.

{\bf plots of color differences between fake and stamps}

{\bf plots of photo v5\_6}

In a final test, we have also taken a sample of nearby bright galaxies 
and compared large-aperture photometry between our images and images
from Montage. We randomly select 200 galaxies brighter than $r=15$ to
perform this test. We compare aperture photometry within a radius of
$1.3 r_{90}$ for each galaxy. In general, the fluxes and colors are in
good agreement. The median ratio of the flux estimated from the
Montage images to our flux estimate to is about 96\%, as for the point
source estimates above (and likely for the same reason). The standard
deviations around this mean for the $(u,g,r,i,z)$ bands are
$(5,2,1,2,3)\%$.  

\subsection{Deblended galaxy photometry}
\label{sec:deblendgal}

{\bf Comparisons of mock data to dimage measurements}

{\bf Comparisons of mock data to photo v5.4, v5.6}

\section{ Summary}

In this paper, we have fit a smooth model to the sky background in
SDSS images, suitable for subtracting off for the purposes of
measuring large, bright galaxies.  While this model has no physical
motivation, it has apparently the right balance of freedom and
physical constraints to adequately describe most of the SDSS imaging.

We have tested the measurements of point sources in the sky subtracted
images, to ensure that they are not signficantly degraded with respect
to the original SDSS data.  In addition, we have inserted fake
galaxies into the data and reran the sky subtraction to evaluate how
well our procedure works.  We find substantial improvement with
respect to the standard pipelines.  Whereas for the standard SDSS {\tt
photo} pipeline the sky-subtraction becomes important at the 20\%
level at $r_{50}>10$ arcsec or so, comparable errors in our method
occur only at radii $r_{50}>100$ arcsec. 

We have compared our results to a similar service provided by IRSA,
the Montage package. Essentially, our results are similar to theirs
for large objects, though we identify a slight error in their overall
fluxes. In addition, for bright stars their interpolation method
appears to introduce slight errors.

Finally, we make our sky-subtraction results for the SDSS images
public, in two ways.  First, for the NGC portion of SDSS DR7 we
provide a large mosaic server described in \S\ref{sec:distmosaic}.
Second, for all of the SDSS DR8 data we provide the individual,
sky-subtracted and calibrated frames, as described in
\S\ref{sec:fields}.

\acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge funding support from NASA grants
06-GALEX06-0030, NNX09AC85G and NNX09AC95G, and \emph{Spitzer} grant
G05-AR-50443. This research has made use of NASA's Astrophysics Data
System and of the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) which is
operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.

Funding for SDSS-III has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Science
Foundation, and the U.S. Department of Energy. The SDSS-III web site
is http://www.sdss3.org/.

SDSS-III is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium for the
Participating Institutions of the SDSS-III Collaboration including the
University of Arizona, the Brazilian Participation Group, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, University of Cambridge, University of Florida,
the French Participation Group, the German Participation Group, the
Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias, the Michigan State/Notre
Dame/JINA Participation Group, Johns Hopkins University, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics,
New Mexico State University, New York University, the Ohio State
University, University of Portsmouth, Princeton University, University
of Tokyo, the University of Utah, Vanderbilt University, University of
Virginia, University of Washington, and Yale University.

This research made use of Montage, funded by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration's Earth Science Technology Office, Computation
Technologies Project, under Cooperative Agreement Number NCC5-626 between
NASA and the California Institute of Technology. Montage is maintained by
the NASA/IPAC Infrared Science Archive.

\bibliographystyle{apj}
\bibliography{apj-jour,ccpp}

\newpage
\include{skysub_figures}

%\newpage
%\include{skysub_tables}

\end{document}
